[Music].
[Tom Turbiville]: Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley. I'm Tom Turbiville.
[Tom Turbiville]: It was natural that Tom Hatfield would write the definitive biography of General Earl Rudder.
[Tom Turbiville]: After all, as a student, he worked summers at the Texas Land Office when General Rudder was its commissioner and later served in an Army Reserve unit that was under Rudder's command.
[Tom Turbiville]: But that's not why Tom Hatfield wrote the book, Rudder from Leader to Legend.
[Tom Turbiville]: See, Tom Hatfield is a lifelong educator and like General Rudder was a college president
[Tom Turbiville]: and now is one of the foremost historians on World War II and military history.
[Tom Turbiville]: He's a senior research fellow at the Dolph Brisco Center for American History at the University of Texas and is director of its military history institute.
[Tom Turbiville]: It is indeed an honor to welcome historian and author Tom Hatfield to Veterans of the Valley.
[Tom Turbiville]: Mr. Hatfield, it is an honor to have you and
[Tom Turbiville]: And thank you for your book on behalf of all lackeys who love General Rudder.
[Thomas Hatfield]: It was a labor of love.
[Thomas Hatfield]: I enjoyed all of it.
[Tom Turbiville]: Absolutely.
[Tom Turbiville]: Nearly a decade in the research and the writing of the book, as I understand.
[Thomas Hatfield]: Well, you could actually say that the research goes back for a half a century when I worked in the land office, as you mentioned, and would see General Rudder then coming and going.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And that's a superficial impression, but it was nonetheless useful when I was trying to describe him.
[Tom Turbiville]: Besides your own relationship with General Rudder with the land office and then later serving in the reserves under his command, you're 25 years younger than he was.
[Tom Turbiville]: So why, after writing several books on military history, did you choose this significant biography to be your next project?
[Thomas Hatfield]: Well, Rudder had always intrigued me and interested me.
[Thomas Hatfield]: For a long time, I thought he was one of the foremost of the battlefield commanders in the war in Europe.
[Thomas Hatfield]: But what most people know about him and what I knew about him was what he had done on one day, D-Day, June 6, 1944.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And, you know, it was 11 months of war after that.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And he was awarded every decoration for valor except the Medal of Honor.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And so obviously he had done a lot after that, but it wasn't in the history books.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And so I wanted to know what he had done.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And then I wanted to know truly what kind of president was he of Texas A&M from 1959 to 1970 when the great transformational changes occurred.
[Thomas Hatfield]: So I really wanted to document those two parts of the story of what did he do during the war,
[Thomas Hatfield]: and then what he'd done as president of Texas A&M.
[Tom Turbiville]: It was a very definitive time when he was president, and it's so significant that this book does deal with the 11 months, as you say, after Pointe du Hoc, which is still so definitive of his battle service, Pointe du Hoc, and we'll talk about that.
[Tom Turbiville]: I guess every author of nonfiction, 90% of the work is the research involved in it, and you
[Tom Turbiville]: You researched not only at your desk, but by foot, by, as it says in the preface, and I'll just read it very quickly and you can comment on it.
[Tom Turbiville]: With no idea of writing his biography, I interviewed men in England and France who had known him during the war.
[Tom Turbiville]: The Pointe du Hoc battlefield where he emerged as a legendary figure was as familiar as my neighborhood park.
[Tom Turbiville]: So you got to know his every step.
[Thomas Hatfield]: Well, I've, while teaching,
[Thomas Hatfield]: I've taught in Normandy several times.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And while I was there, I went to Pont du Hoc regularly, as well as along Omaha Beach, taking groups of students there.
[Thomas Hatfield]: So that's how it really, that's how Pont du Hoc became as familiar to me as it was.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And that's probably why, increasingly, Rudder captured my attention.
[Tom Turbiville]: Talk about your first introduction to him as working for him at the Texas land office, which was actually a statewide race that he actually had to win by election.
[Tom Turbiville]: But talk about really your first interaction with him at the land office many years later.
[Thomas Hatfield]: Well, you have to understand that he was the boss man.
[Thomas Hatfield]: He was a commissioner and I was the lowest of the low.
[Thomas Hatfield]: I was a halftime worker.
[Thomas Hatfield]: a file clerk and my interaction with him was to see him coming and going in the land office.
[Thomas Hatfield]: I did have a couple of, I rode on the elevator with him a couple of times and once I remember that we were alone and it was an awkward moment for me because he was this important person and I was this very unimportant person.
[Tom Turbiville]: I think you built something for him though, right?
[Thomas Hatfield]: Well, that was several years later.
[Thomas Hatfield]: After I had graduated, I'd gone off to the Army, and I came back to go for graduate study to the University of Texas.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And so I was an officer attached to his headquarters, and he was in the commanding general of the 90th Infantry Division.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And we were at one of those summer camps at Fort Polk,
[Thomas Hatfield]: I was so valuable in the division headquarters that I was assigned responsibility to construct his latrine and given two professional architects and a half dozen other fellows to get the job done.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And we did it.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And it was an important facility.
[Thomas Hatfield]: Yeah, it was.
[Tom Turbiville]: Indeed.
[Tom Turbiville]: His early years, Eden, Texas.
[Tom Turbiville]: For people who don't know where Eden, Texas is, it's where Highway 87 and 83 cross about 40 miles southeast of San Angelo.
[Tom Turbiville]: Talk about his early years in Eden, and that's where he developed a passion for what would be a part of his early career, and that was the sport of football and really all athletics.
[Tom Turbiville]: Talk about that.
[Thomas Hatfield]: Well, Earl was, as his wife Margaret Rudder said to me, Earl was a town boy.
[Thomas Hatfield]: The Rudders did not have land.
[Thomas Hatfield]: His father was what was known as a commission man.
[Thomas Hatfield]: which meant that he would buy and sell almost anything and take as his profit a percentage of the sale.
[Thomas Hatfield]: So life was really was a stern struggle economically in the Rudder family.
[Thomas Hatfield]: Earl was the fifth of six brothers, that is six brothers who lived.
[Thomas Hatfield]: His mother actually gave birth to 13 children.
[Thomas Hatfield]: But he was a popular boy around town, seemed to be happy-go-lucky in a town no larger than Eden with population approximately 600.
[Thomas Hatfield]: If he or his friends got into mischief, very likely with the social connections between the mothers in the town, his mother would know about it before he got home.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And his mother was really the backbone of the
[Thomas Hatfield]: of the family insistent upon church attendance and so that's then in 1925 when he was 15 years old Eden had a football team for the first time and there he discovered his passion which was eventually became his ticket the way it took him out of Eden because he was awarded a scholarship to play at the
[Thomas Hatfield]: institution we now know as Tarleton State University, which was then a two-year branch of Texas A&M.
[Thomas Hatfield]: Right.
[Thomas Hatfield]: So that's how he left Eden, and it was football that gave him his handhold on life.
[Tom Turbiville]: Let's fast forward there to Tarleton because he did leave Eden.
[Tom Turbiville]: He went to Tarleton.
[Tom Turbiville]: He played football there, and there was a gentleman that you write about in his book that was probably the first and a very significantly influential person in his life, and that was his football coach, not because of his coaching of X's and O's,
[Tom Turbiville]: Coach W.L.
[Tom Turbiville]: Wisdom, obviously a very important person in Earl Rudder's life.
[Thomas Hatfield]: Well, he's Coach W.J.
[Thomas Hatfield]: Wisdom, who was not only a self-taught coach with a remarkable one and loss record, but he was also known for his ethics, that he
[Thomas Hatfield]: posted where his players would see in the dressing room the great line from the sports writer Grantland Rice that's mostly been forgotten now that when the one great scorer comes to mark beside your name, he cares not whether you won or lost, but how you played the game.
[Thomas Hatfield]: Well, Rudder and W.J.
[Thomas Hatfield]: Wisdom were great competitors to be sure, but how you played the game
[Thomas Hatfield]: How you treated the other players, how you related to the officials of the game were also very important to them.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And Wisdom became the Rudder's role model, a positive role model.
[Thomas Hatfield]: In some ways, his father was a negative role model.
[Thomas Hatfield]: So W.J.
[Thomas Hatfield]: Wisdom offset that difference between him and his father.
[Tom Turbiville]: Indeed, you write in the book, from wisdom, Rudder would learn much more than coaching techniques and game strategies.
[Tom Turbiville]: He would gradually absorb the subtleties of managing and motivating young men to perform demanding tasks while working together at the upper limits of their physical exertion.
[Tom Turbiville]: Obviously, this was a precursor to him being a commander in World War II and a president of a university.
[Tom Turbiville]: So it started way back then.
[Thomas Hatfield]: Oh, that's right.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And the coaching was...
[Thomas Hatfield]: just the perfect preparation to command an elite special forces type of unit, the 2nd Ranger Battalion.
[Tom Turbiville]: He entered Texas A&M in 1930, finished in 21 months.
[Tom Turbiville]: When he first arrived, you said in your book that they thought that he was probably sharp enough to finish in three years.
[Tom Turbiville]: He went through A&M and got his degree in 21 months.
[Tom Turbiville]: And I think you said that even in the middle of that, he spent about three months
[Tom Turbiville]: serving in military training.
[Thomas Hatfield]: Well, that's right.
[Thomas Hatfield]: I found in the registrar's office at Texas A&M the records of the counseling session when he arrived on the campus in September of 1930.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And his academic counselor estimated that he would be in the class of 1933.
[Thomas Hatfield]: But Rudder took maximum load and more that is course load.
[Thomas Hatfield]: He did not go home to Eden in the first summer.
[Thomas Hatfield]: He did.
[Thomas Hatfield]: He went for summer training as cadets were required to do.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And then he returned to the campus and always with numerous part time jobs as well as playing as well as playing football.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And so he finished up by graduating in May of 1932, 21 months.
[Tom Turbiville]: right right 1932 you mentioned in your book and you you credit a gentleman that we've had on our show henry dethloff as saying that people who graduated
from college in 1932 were probably the hardest hit by the depression and when he graduated he had no job and it you said he had to actually go back to Eden just to eat while he was
looking for a job
[Thomas Hatfield]: That's what he said. He said he went all over the state trying to find a job and a job he wanted was coaching high school football and teaching in high school.
[Thomas Hatfield]: He had prepared himself to be a football coach while here at Texas A&M as well as to teach.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And there were just no jobs available.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And so as he told someone years later, in order to eat, he had to go back home.
[Thomas Hatfield]: So he went to Eden and got a job, really a pick and shovel job, working on the roads.
[Thomas Hatfield]: on the highways.
[Thomas Hatfield]: The Texas Highway Department was then building roads across West Texas.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And that's what he did the first year.
[Thomas Hatfield]: He was out of college.
[Tom Turbiville]: And then
[Tom Turbiville]: He found just down the road, just a little bit southeast of Eden or east of Eden is where it was, a town called Brady, Texas, which obviously meant a lot to him.
[Tom Turbiville]: And that's where he got his first teaching and coaching job.
[Thomas Hatfield]: That's right.
[Thomas Hatfield]: Brady became his adopted home.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And so that's where he was football coach from 1933 to 1938 with a very good record.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And he was popular in the town.
[Thomas Hatfield]: He was also a very popular teacher.
[Tom Turbiville]: He made a whopping $100 a month for nine months.
[Thomas Hatfield]: That's the first year.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And a couple of years later, he started getting $110 a month.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And he got paid for 10 months rather than nine months.
[Tom Turbiville]: But he was not only coaching football and baseball.
[Tom Turbiville]: He was teaching math, history.
[Thomas Hatfield]: Chemistry.
[Tom Turbiville]: For $100 a month.
[Tom Turbiville]: That's right.
[Thomas Hatfield]: Yeah, he said those preparations were really hard.
[Thomas Hatfield]: He learned a lot in preparing.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And he became the student.
[Thomas Hatfield]: as a teacher that he had never been before.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And many people have had that experience of learning more while teaching than while being the student.
[Tom Turbiville]: 1933 was a very important year in his life, obviously, because he met a lady named Margaret Williamson, who they called Chick.
[Tom Turbiville]: And they kind of fell in love dancing in the dance halls at Menard, Texas.
[Tom Turbiville]: So obviously that was a union that was very important and very lasting.
[Thomas Hatfield]: Well, it was sort of a long-term courtship.
[Thomas Hatfield]: They first began meeting to dance, an upscale dance hall type in Menard, Texas, which was sort of between the Williamson Ranch, where she lived, and Eden, where he lived.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And that was on through the summer of 1933.
[Thomas Hatfield]: But they did not marry until four years later.
[Tom Turbiville]: Talk about...
[Tom Turbiville]: He was at Tarleton, like you said, and he got the head coaching job at Tarleton, that's where I'm going, in the summer of 1938.
[Tom Turbiville]: And he was helped in getting that job by a fellow that a famous building on campus is named after.
[Tom Turbiville]: So talk about the relationship between him and G. Raleigh White.
[Thomas Hatfield]: Well, it was a very interesting story.
[Thomas Hatfield]: G. Raleigh White,
[Thomas Hatfield]: was a very important person around Brady and one of the really major, certainly major land holder in the region and a well-known citizen in Texas.
[Thomas Hatfield]: He was then a member of the governing board of Texas A&M and the governing board really had oversight of the appointments to
[Thomas Hatfield]: to any one of the components of the Texas A&M system.
[Thomas Hatfield]: So when so G. Raleigh White had the potential, in fact, was quite influential in helping Rudder to become the head football coach at Tarleton.
[Thomas Hatfield]: The interesting thing about all of this, which shows something of Rudder's character, is that there were two banks in Brady.
[Thomas Hatfield]: One was a bank bank on by Mr. White.
[Thomas Hatfield]: and there was another bank there as well.
[Thomas Hatfield]: A couple of years before, probably 1936, Rudder had gone to Mr. White's bank and made an application for a loan.
[Thomas Hatfield]: White was out of town, and it was denied.
[Thomas Hatfield]: He then immediately went to the competitive bank, filed his application, and it was approved.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And after that, for Rudder's entire life,
[Thomas Hatfield]: He banked only with the competitor for Mr. White.
[Thomas Hatfield]: He would not compromise, not even when White would be decisive in his appointment to Tarleton.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And I think it's an extraordinary story.
[Thomas Hatfield]: White helped him, but Rudder never compromised.
[Thomas Hatfield]: in his loyalty to the competitive bank.
[Tom Turbiville]: That is an amazing story.
[Tom Turbiville]: I want to move on to his military history because this is a story that certainly is hard to tell in 30 minutes, but we're giving it a try.
[Tom Turbiville]: June of 1941, reported active duty First Lieutenant James E. Rudder, 2nd Infantry Division.
[Tom Turbiville]: Promoted the very next day to captain.
[Tom Turbiville]: And talk about his early military career leading up to, obviously this was before
[Tom Turbiville]: of Pearl Harbor, but then get us into the preparation for the Normandy landing and the final push, and what does define Earl Rudder, and that is the days June 6th through June 8th of Pointe du Hoc.
[Thomas Hatfield]: Well, you're right.
[Thomas Hatfield]: He was called to active duty in June of 1941 and was in this country involved in training until late November of 1943.
[Thomas Hatfield]: One of those assignments was as a training officer of the 83rd Infantry Division, which was based in Indiana.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And the some high ranking general passed down an order that all infantry divisions should have should have make Ranger type training available.
[Thomas Hatfield]: That is based on strength and endurance.
[Thomas Hatfield]: team work and the training would be involved competition, very physical, tough, tough stuff.
[Thomas Hatfield]: Well, the general who made that mandate came for a visit and he what he saw, what Rudder was doing was the best ranger type training that they had ever seen.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And Rudder was there was it was not a ranger at the time.
[Thomas Hatfield]: But the general also had under his command a newly formed unit called the Second Ranger Battalion, which was Camp Forest, Tennessee near Chattanooga, and it was not progressing well.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And so he he picked up selected Rudder on the basis of what he saw of Rudders training program in 83rd Division.
[Thomas Hatfield]: He picked out Rudder to become the commanding officer of the Second Ranger Battalion.
[Thomas Hatfield]: So Rudder then moved to the 2nd Ranger Battalion and through there in Tennessee and amphibious training in Florida and finally up the East Coast to board the Queen Elizabeth in New York Harbor in late November of 43, that's the state-side training period.
[Thomas Hatfield]: In England, he arrived without knowing what his mission would be.
[Thomas Hatfield]: At the time, everyone knew
[Thomas Hatfield]: that there would be an attack from Britain across the English Channel on the French coast in the spring of 44.
[Thomas Hatfield]: He didn't know what his mission was.
[Thomas Hatfield]: On January 4, 1944,
[Thomas Hatfield]: He was called to General Omar Bradley's headquarters and told that the 2nd Ranger Battalion would, it was essential, that the 2nd Ranger Battalion would make this attack on this impregnable cliffs on the Normandy coast called Pointe du Hoc.
[Thomas Hatfield]: and knock out six large German guns that were in place there.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And Bradley said it was the most difficult assignment he made to any officer under his command in the entire war.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And with Rudder doing it, the 2nd Ranger Battalion being successful, he was thereafter, that's when he became a legend and an icon in the United States Army.
[Tom Turbiville]: One point in the book, and I'll just go over it that I just found fascinating that people don't know, is that this provisional ranger group that was given this assignment, there were three task force A, B, and C, and originally he had assigned himself and his staff to task force C, but the person that he had assigned to command task force A unfortunately got drunk the day before the mission
[Tom Turbiville]: Rudder fired him and assigned himself to Task Force A, and that was the one that went directly to Pointe du Hoc.
[Thomas Hatfield]: That's correct.
[Thomas Hatfield]: Well, there were two Ranger Battalions involved in the Normandy landing.
[Thomas Hatfield]: There was Rudder's 2nd Ranger Battalion, and then another battalion, the 5th Ranger Battalion, had come over from the States in late January of 1944.
[Thomas Hatfield]: So they were both battalions were placed under Rudder's command.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And it was his responsibility to to design the attack plan.
[Thomas Hatfield]: There were for the three missions that they needed to accomplish.
[Thomas Hatfield]: Well, he since he was an overall command, he had a separate had another officer would command Task Force A, Task Force B and Task Force C. And Rudder would be and
[Thomas Hatfield]: overall command, and just where he would go ashore would depend upon the success of the first landing.
[Thomas Hatfield]: Well, the man he picked out to command Task Force A to make the assault on Pointe du Hoc got drunk.
[Thomas Hatfield]: They were on board a British ship.
[Thomas Hatfield]: There was a bar in the wardroom of nearly all British vessels.
[Thomas Hatfield]: Actually, they'd already gone to sea en route to Pointe du Hoc.
[Thomas Hatfield]: Rudder didn't know anything about it.
[Thomas Hatfield]: They were under radio silence.
[Thomas Hatfield]: They didn't know until Eisenhower canceled.
[Thomas Hatfield]: He put off the invasion by one day from June 5th to June 6th.
[Thomas Hatfield]: So when they returned to port, again, still under radio silence, then Rudder learned of what this officer, the drunkenness of this officer,
[Thomas Hatfield]: And he then appointed a committee to investigate the rumors, the stories he'd heard.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And his committee came back saying yes, that it was true.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And what I say is that that showed he had the instincts of a university president that he would appoint a committee to make this investigation rather than relying on his own judgment.
[Thomas Hatfield]: So he basically fired that,
[Thomas Hatfield]: the officer in charge of the task force going to Pont du Hoc and took his place.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And all that sounds like at the moment, then it sounded like disaster.
[Thomas Hatfield]: But in fact, the derelict officer had changed history for the better because Rudder performed superbly and the officer who took the other task force that he would have been with performed equally superb.
[Tom Turbiville]: We just have a few minutes left.
[Tom Turbiville]: The name of the book is Rudder from Leader to Legend.
[Tom Turbiville]: Let's run through some photographs from the book that were supplied to us by various people in the book.
[Tom Turbiville]: And we'll just run through him real quick because we want to get on to his time at A&M.
[Tom Turbiville]: There's the cover of the book, Rudder, From Leader to Legend.
[Tom Turbiville]: This is an early photograph, 1932, from when he was a student, cadet at Texas A&M.
[Tom Turbiville]: Margaret Rudder supplied that picture from his service in World War II.
[Tom Turbiville]: And this is from Pointe du Hoc in the preparation for the scaling of the cliffs.
[Tom Turbiville]: There is Earl and Margaret Rudder at the time that they were married in 1937.
[Tom Turbiville]: This is when he was actually, I believe, vice president before he became president.
[Thomas Hatfield]: No, he was president.
[Thomas Hatfield]: Was he president at that time?
[Tom Turbiville]: Visiting some folks over at the battalion, I think.
[Tom Turbiville]: And he has a very close relationship with President Johnson.
[Tom Turbiville]: And finally, in 1970, in March of 1970, his passing, and nearly 5,000 turned out at G. Raleigh White Coliseum for his memorial service.
[Tom Turbiville]: We just have a few minutes left.
[Tom Turbiville]: I knew that this would happen, but if you would, just his
[Tom Turbiville]: his presidency at Texas A&M.
[Tom Turbiville]: It came during a time, the Vietnam War, the Kennedy assassination.
[Tom Turbiville]: It was a very essential time in our nation's history and obviously for Texas A&M.
[Tom Turbiville]: Talk about his presidency.
[Thomas Hatfield]: Well, it was a tumultuous time and he gained considerable national attention by his outspoken opposition to student disorders on the Texas A&M campus as well as on any campus in the United States.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And it's easy to forget now about how serious some of those disorders, in fact the riots
[Thomas Hatfield]: and the destruction were on some other campuses, including several people, several were killed, students were killed.
[Thomas Hatfield]: So he maintained order.
[Thomas Hatfield]: But I think the most important things he did as president was the sort of transformational changes that he led.
[Thomas Hatfield]: At some point fairly early in his presidency,
[Thomas Hatfield]: He really came to the realization that A&M had to change.
[Thomas Hatfield]: At the time, it was all male and all military and with limited degree programs.
[Thomas Hatfield]: And it was a just someone described it as a suboptimal regional land grant college and not a comp and not a comprehensive university.
[Tom Turbiville]: Mr. Hatfield, I'm sorry, but 30 minutes goes by very quickly.
[Tom Turbiville]: So if people want to know the rest of it, they can buy the book, and we hope they do.
[Tom Turbiville]: Texas A&M University Press, $30, a great buy.
[Tom Turbiville]: You can go online to tamupress.com.
[Tom Turbiville]: Thank you very much for what you did.
[Thomas Hatfield]: My pleasure.
[Thomas Hatfield]: Thank you.
[Tom Turbiville]: I appreciate it.
[Tom Turbiville]: In a few days, Rudder from Leader to Legend will be in bookstores, and it's a must-read for not just those with a passion for military history or World War II, but certainly all those throughout the world who hold Texas A&M and its history so dear.
[Tom Turbiville]: We thank Tom Hatfield for his authorship of this wonderful book and for being our guest today.
[Tom Turbiville]: I'm Tom Turbiville.
[Tom Turbiville]: Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.
[Music.]